Enhance Documentation: Update `contributing.qmd`, `README.md`, and `index.qmd` (#51)
cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide: index.qmd

subtitle: "Methods for Generating and Testing Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats"
---

> If you wish to provide optimized access to geospatial data, this guide is for you. Given geospatial data’s growing size, users can no longer rely solely on file downloads to achieve their science goals.

Reviewer: I think we should re-order these sentences, possibly have an expanded section on Why cloud optimize.

Author: @wildintellect, I expanded the section, though we might want to review or adapt it.

subtitle: "Methods for Generating and Testing Cloud-Optimized Geospatial Formats"
---

## Why Cloud Optimize?

Geospatial data is experiencing exponential growth in both size and complexity. As a result, traditional data access methods, such as file downloads, have become increasingly impractical for achieving scientific objectives. With the limitations of these older methods becoming more apparent, cloud-optimized geospatial formats present a much-needed solution.

Cloud optimization enables efficient, on-the-fly access to geospatial data, offering several advantages:

> 1. **Reduced Latency**: Data can be fetched and processed much faster compared to downloading entire files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Reduced Latency**: Subsets of the raw data can be fetched and processed much faster compared to downloading entire files.
```

> 2. **Scalability**: Cloud-optimized formats are designed to scale, making it easier to work with large datasets.

Reviewer 2: Could we be a little more specific? Perhaps
```suggestion
2. **Scalability**: Cloud-optimized formats are usually stored on cloud object storage which is infinitely scalable. Object storage when combined with metadata about where different bits of data are stored support many parallel read requests, making it easier to work with large datasets.
```

> 3. **Flexibility**: Users can access only the necessary data portions, making the process more efficient.

Reviewer 2: I don't really understand how "access only the necessary data portions" means its flexible?

Author: So, it is flexible for me because it allows different data uses based on different user needs. I tried to capture it better in the new description. Let me know what you think!

> 4. **Cost-Effectiveness**: Reduced data transfer and storage needs can lower costs.

Reviewer 2: May add that many of these formats offer compression for reduced storage costs as well.

## The opportunity

> Storing data in the cloud does not on its own solve geospatial's data problem. Users cannot reasonably wait to download, store, and work with large files on their machines. Large volumes of data must be available via subsetting methods to access data in memory.

Reviewer 2: I prefer the first sentence as is, although I'm willing to be overruled @wildintellect @kylebarron

Author: I will wait for @wildintellect and @kylebarron feedback. I prefer the latter, personally, more in terms of the verb selection.

Reviewer 3: I don't have a strong preference. I see `just putting` and `on its own solve` as somewhat similar meanings.

> While it is possible to provide subsetting as a service, this requires maintenance of additional servers and network latency (data has to go to the server where the subsetting service is running and then to the user). With cloud-optimized formats and the appropriate libraries, subsets of data can be accessed remotely without introducing an additional server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it is possible to provide subsetting as a service, this requires ongoing maintenance of additional servers and as well as extra network latency when accessing data (data has to go to the server where the subsetting service is running and then to the user). With cloud-optimized formats and the appropriate libraries, subsets of data can be accessed directly from an end user's machine without introducing an additional server.
```

Notes:

- Some data formats cover multiple data types, specifically:

>     - GeoJSON can be used for both vector and point data.

Reviewer: This is confusing, vector is points, lines, and polygons

Author: I used the exact wording from the last revision; I just changed the '*' list to a '-' list accidentally with my editor. 

Perhaps it is meant to mean point clouds? I have not seen Geojson used for point clouds at scale.

Author: @wildintellect give this comment another look with the new changes, but we may want to check in with @abarciauskas-bgse and @kylebarron .

Reviewer 3: I agree that I've never seen GeoJSON used for point data.

Reviewer: Not a blocker for this PR

Notes:

- Some data formats cover multiple data types, specifically:

>     - GeoJSON can be used for vector and point cloud data.

Reviewer 2: Curious @wildintellect @kylebarron if you agree this should be "point" data or "point cloud" data?

Reviewer: that's at least a little more clear

Author: point cloud is more clear @wildintellect ?

Reviewer 3: I don't usually think of GeoJSON as supporting point cloud data, but I thought "point" would be included under the "vector" umbrella. So overall I don't necessarily see GeoJSON covering multiple geometry types.

Reviewer: oh sorry, @kylebarron is right ... that line should say vector; point, lines, polygons

Point cloud should be mentioned somewhere else.

## Running examples

> Most of the data formats covered in this guide have a Jupyter Notebook example that covers the basics of reading and writing the given format. At the top of each notebook is a link to an environment.yml file describing what libraries need to be installed to run correctly. You can use Conda or Mamba (a successor to Conda with faster package installs) to install the environment needed to run the notebook.

Reviewer: > (a successor to Conda with faster package installs)
a Conda compatible method of faster package installs.

Why were the links dropped?
